- Hey everybody, welcome to Python Bytes.
And hey, let's just kick it off.
It's Michael and me today.
Hello and welcome to Python Bytes
where we deliver Python news and headlines
directly to your earbuds.
This is episode 287 recorded June 7th
and I am Brian Okken.
- Michael Kennedy.
- It's good to talk to you, Michael.
- Yeah, good to see you again, Brian.
Again, we've got our wardrobe matching our background here,
which is fantastic.
- Yeah, we like, you know,
texted each other in the morning to make sure.
(laughing)
- I'm purple, I'm gonna get a new shirt now.
No, it's great.
Good to see you as always.
Lots of fun Python things to talk about here.
- Yeah, yeah, well, let's jump into the first one.
- All right, let's do it.
Well, the first thing that I wanna talk about here
is distributing Python applications.
Now, this is a little bit in the Python GUIs side of thing.
Something you just can't get enough of in terms of like,
hey, could we have more ways to do this that are like awesome?
How about if we had ways that were automatic?
Yeah.
So I want to talk about this thing by Brent Foley-Bregret
called autopy2exe.
And it basically does what it says right in the name there.
Converts a .py file to a .exe using a simple graphical
interface. Now this GitHub description is a bit of a Windows bias because it will
also create it to Mac apps as well to .app files so it's not just a Windows
thing. It's pretty popular has 2,000 stars 400 forks and what it is a
UI on top of things like Py2App or PyInstaller, specifically PyInstaller.
So what you do is you fire this thing up
and out pops this user interface
that if you're watching the YouTube stream,
you can see there's a user interface here
and it just says,
pick the starting Python file for your application.
And you can say, what do you want the output to be?
One file or one directory?
I think we all want it to be one file, probably generally,
but maybe a directory, I don't know.
What else you're gonna,
you wanna do some other things there.
But what I did is I tried this against my
URLify little appy thing, which let me pull that up.
This is something I built a while ago with rumps,
which is fantastic, ridiculously uncomplicated
menu bar apps or something like that for Mac.
And all it is a little thing that goes up in your Mac bar
and it has like, you know, slugify text or trim it
or lowercase is just, I'm constantly taking names
of like file names and turning them into something
I could put as a URL or like a title of a video
or something and turning it into something
that would be a good URL.
So that's what this little app is for.
But here's the thing is it's a Python app
that runs in the menu bar on my Mac with no terminal view
and I wanted to be able to distribute it to people.
And so the way you get it is you just download a zip file
which is just the zip up.app executable.
Right, so I had done a bunch of stuff with the setup
and all those kinds of things
with PyInstaller to build this.
So my test case was, well, let me take this auto
py2exe thing and just point it at that
and see what happens.
And what happened was good things.
It was really interesting.
There's an app.py, but there's dependent Python files
that it uses.
I mean, I'm not a beast, I don't write my entire application in one file.
Like there's other things broken apart in there that gets bundled up.
And it somehow discovered that, pulled those all in.
So I just picked the top level file and it found the dependencies,
you know, the requirements.txt type dependencies and so on.
And it created a .app file that, as far as I could tell, ran just fine.
- That's cool. - Isn't that cool?
>> Yeah, I like it.
>> You can decide if it's a window-based application,
so hide the console,
which is what I said because I want it to run in the menu bar.
But if it was a console-based app,
but you just wanted to distribute it as a single thing with no Python,
well, no Python requirements,
you could create a console-based app.
You set the icon,
you can add in additional files.
So if there's JSON configuration files,
or YAML files, or images,
or something like that you need to take along,
you can configure that there.
And then there's an advanced section that expands out
to be like pages of stuff that I don't remember.
Same thing for settings.
And then you just click the big convert to py to exe button
and you get ironically not an exe, but a .app file.
And there you go.
- That's cool.
- Isn't that cool?
So for people who are playing around with this,
I think they even have,
let's be listening to us here.
They even have a little animated GIF
of how this all works right on the GitHub thing.
So if you wanna see how it works,
I guess there's not a whole lot,
but you browse for the icon,
you go in there and you check off some things
and then you just hit build.
And it takes a little while, but you know,
that's Py2.exe, that's how it goes.
And it just sits there and it cranks away for a while,
bundles it all up and yeah, you've got a little executable.
So if this is something you wanna play with,
but you're like, ah, it's kind of a real pain
to go and figure out, you know, all the setup py commands
in order to get it to do the py installer commands
and whatnot, then, you know,
you can definitely give this a shot.
I think it's pretty neat.
I think with mine, I didn't use py to installer.
I think I used py to app.
Yeah, that's what I used.
So pretty neat.
Yeah, check that out.
I think people will find it helpful
for ways to distribute Python apps.
- Yeah, and I liked it.
It looks pretty professional looking.
And then also, especially, I mean,
especially with internal, like internal company stuff,
that happens a lot where you want to share something.
- Yeah, like just download this and run it.
Please don't ask me how to set up a path
so that your Python that's not Python 3.3,
whatever, right, is the one that runs it.
- Nobody needs to know that it's Python underneath, so.
- Yeah, exactly.
So I really like it.
Oh, one other thing, by the way,
it's a GUI application.
It's self-written in Python.
So you may wonder, well,
what is it doing?
Maybe it's bundled itself.
Obviously, that'd be very meta.
If autopy2xe could deliver an autopy2xe itself,
that's obviously lovely.
It reminded me that I have Chrome
installed when I ran it.
So what it does is it,
it runs something in the background,
then it fires up Chrome, which becomes
the UI in this kind of Windows-looking Chrome window.
And it's not quite an Electron app,
but it's Electron in a style.
So anyway, it's an interesting little UI app itself.
I'm not sure what it's doing, but it works.
>>Nice.
All right, well, I'd like to talk about Jupyter.
So Jupyter Networks.
So how do you use it?
So like, I was just fascinated
by the click baitiness of this, but it's okay.
Eight surprising ways to,
eight surprising ways how to use Jupyter notebooks.
And I gotta say, I didn't know you could do some
of this stuff with Jupyter, so it's pretty cool.
So the first one, package development.
Why would you, I don't know why, but you know,
some people that are more comfortable in Jupyter
than they are an IDE or something, if it's good.
So there's a package called mbdev that you can use to,
it's by a company called Fast AI,
that you can use to help with package development,
including, you know, trying to get your CI working
and your tests all in one place
and demos and documentation and stuff.
So that's kind of neat, I like that idea.
Oh, I definitely should try to play with that
to see how that works.
Apparently there's a video,
somebody gave a talk around it.
- Yes, lovely.
Yeah.
- Build a web app.
So building a web app with Jupyter,
I think that's actually a pretty cool idea.
There's several suggestions using Voila.
I think we covered that.
- Think, yeah, we've covered that before,
but the other one I don't think we have.
Hi, pie widgets.
I'm not sure what that one is.
So I haven't looked at the widgets thing,
but you know, more widgets within your window.
Sure, why not?
Why are there no, it's a widgets thing.
You think there'd be images on the readme, but anyway.
And then a framework called Mercury,
and this shows up several times in this.
So Mercury is, does a lot of stuff
around Jupyter notebooks and doing extra things.
So this shows up several times in this list.
So for one, for creating a web app,
which is kind of neat, especially if you're sharing data
and have interactive stuff,
you might have doing stuff with a web application, be cool.
Slide deck, gotta love it.
I definitely didn't want to try this out
because using NB convert or Mercury,
apparently Mercury does that too,
uses reveal.js.
I think a lot of people have tried reveal.js before
for slides, but having, building it within notebooks,
building your slide decks within notebooks,
and then having that just run, that's cool.
Building a book.
This is something else that sounds pretty interesting.
I'd like to try doing some code, a notebook,
a book-like thing.
Now I don't have, I'm curious about this.
So the book, you build a website that looks like a book,
but that's not a book.
So it says it can be exported to a PDF file,
but I don't see anywhere you're exporting to an EPUB or OB.
So, you know, I call BS on whether that this is a book.
This is a website that holds book contents
as far as I could tell.
Still cool though.
Running a blog.
This is something I had no idea Nicola could do.
So Nicola, Nicola?
I don't know how to pronounce that.
I've ran across it before.
I'm not sure what we, if we've covered it,
but it's a static site generator
and it apparently can take a notebook files
and just run notebooks as a blog.
So that's pretty cool.
- Notebooks as a blog, oh, that's interesting.
- Well, yeah, especially if you're gonna write
about like some Python technique or something,
you just do a little demo of it
and then publish that as a text thing,
or I don't know if it outputs,
I didn't read it close enough.
Outputs the exports every notebook to an HTML file
and then publish all the files on a static website.
That's pretty neat.
Doing reports and dashboards,
that's kind of like Jupyter would rock at that.
And I think we've covered stuff like this before, but.
One of the things in the dashboard section
that I thought was neat was this Mercury tool
has a schedule option.
So once you set up the report,
you can schedule it to execute, you know,
like once a day or every hour or something like that.
And that's pretty neat to not have it do constantly,
but update, you know, update your dashboard.
- I do like that.
That's really cool.
So you could have some kind of dashboard
instead of creating it in the full web app.
You just publish this,
but obviously you want it to refresh, right?
So.
- Yeah.
Yep.
So anyway, that, oh, last one,
- The rest API, this is interesting.
I wouldn't have thought to build a rest API with Jupyter.
So I guess you can do all this stuff,
whether or not you should, I guess it's up to you.
- Yeah, for sure.
Anthony on the audience says,
Nicola works well as a static blog generator,
preferred over Pelican.
- Well, that's saying something, nice.
- That is.
- Yeah.
Brian, wouldn't it be good to know
which ones are like more popular
or which ones maybe you should depend upon?
- Yeah.
- All right, well, let's...
- Let's do this.
- Yeah, that's all right.
So this one is from, let me get it right here.
This is from Tancala Ashok,
and they brought this thing called PipTrends.
It's modeled a little bit after npm-trends,
and it just lets you compare the popularity of packages
based on their GitHub statistics.
So GitHub statistics, that's one metric of popularity,
but let's give it a bit of a run.
So what about if we type Flask?
It says, it immediately pulls up a nice little autocomplete
that says Flask, a simple web framework
for building complex web applications.
But then all the other ones like Flask to Postman and so on,
this is kind of interesting.
I didn't really know about Flask to Postman.
Maybe that we'll talk about that next time,
but let's pick Flask and then immediately,
immediately says, well,
what else might you consider along with this?
Like, well, how about FastAPI and Django?
And what do we have?
It also suggested bottle for a little while.
So we'll do a bottle in there maybe, and let's do a search.
And it comes up with a graph that honestly surprised me
a fair amount.
There's different levels of popularity,
but that's not the first thing that surprised me.
The first thing that surprised me is the regular cycles
that all of these packages seem to go through.
Does that seem strange to you?
- Well, I've noticed it before
and I don't really know what's going on.
Is it the weekends?
- Yes, very good.
So four or five was the weekend,
six, four, six, five, and that's where the dip is.
So people download stuff less on the weekends
because there's less.
Create me a new environment, create me a new project,
check it out, set it up, right, all that kind of stuff.
Which is healthy, but there's still a decent number
of downloads going on the weekend there.
- Yeah, I kind of wish that I'd like to see
like a seven day moving window, moving average for PyPI.
- Yeah, yeah, like a different window averaging
or predicted function.
Anyway, what we get here is we see that Flask, sorry,
FastAPI and Django are super similar,
like almost tied according to GitHub statistics.
And these are downloads.
I don't think you get downloads from GitHub.
I think this is probably from PyPI or BigQuery or something.
I'm not sure where those numbers are coming from
because I don't know where those are on,
these like time series download numbers are on GitHub.
So they're probably coming from somewhere else.
But yeah, you can throw different projects in here
and say, ah, this one's relatively, you know,
popular compared to that or whatever.
What do you think?
- I think it's kind of neat, especially with comparing.
I mean, I've used, there's other ways to get the stats,
but having, being able to grab a few related ones,
having suggestions is kind of neat too.
- Yeah.
It also has some more information about the package.
Like if you go to Flask, it's 12 years old.
It has 45 versions.
Its last release was one month ago.
Its dev status is stable.
It requires Python 3.7, gives the license
and who it's intended for.
And you can see similarly for FastAPI,
for Django and Bottle and so on.
- Huh, cool.
- Also down here in the GitHub stats,
you can see for like Flask, there's 59,000 stars.
For Django, there's 64,000 stars.
Number of open PRs.
Wow, FastAPI has a lot of open PRs and issues.
That's crazy.
Oh, wait, it was last update and so on.
So yeah, and it also gives you more comparisons down here.
Like, well, that was fun.
What about Flask versus Django versus FastAPI,
which is what we did,
but or NumPy versus Pandas, for example,
you can see them and so on.
- That's pretty neat.
I like it.
- Yeah, yeah.
So piptrends.com, you can check it out.
- So I want to talk about,
what do I want to talk about?
Class, being classy.
actually been callable.
So Trey Hunter put this blog post out called,
is it a class or a function?
It's a callable.
And this is actually something that I guess I realized,
I just sort of got used to with Python.
It's a lot more,
if you call something,
like as if you would call a function,
it might not be a function.
It might be a class.
It might be an object that's callable.
it might be a class object.
All sorts of stuff you could do.
Like for, just to be clear, we were talking about,
or he talks about classes or callables.
So in like some, in like JavaScript or C++,
you'd have to say new something.
So you'd have to say like a new data object or something.
But in Python, you just call date time with some parameters
and you get back a date time object.
That's neat.
But so it's just, I guess this is a good article
to go through just to realize
that you don't really have to care.
There's a whole bunch of stuff that act like functions
and it's okay if they're not functions.
You just have to know if it's callable.
And he talks a little bit about using a knit,
a Dunder knit to make something callable that works.
Properties are like decorators or a thing
that are a callable item.
There's some, it's just a good discussion
about all of this.
I thought this was a fascinating article
and I'm not sure I ever really thought
about partials before.
Like a partial function is like a function
that creates a, almost creates an object
and then you call it with some more stuff
and then it creates the rest of it or creates an, anyway.
Maybe I got that wrong.
- Yeah, from functuals, I'd never used partial before.
Okay.
- Yeah, and then there's a call decorator
or a call dunder method that you can use
that is helps out with making partials.
And talks about iterators and decorators
and all sorts of stuff like that,
that actually act like callables,
but they're not, they're like objects.
The thing that I don't know where this is,
but there's a statement in here that I thought was amazing.
So there's a page on the PyPI documentation
of the built-in functions within Python.
And Trey points out that of the 69,
there's 69 listed built-in functions within Python,
only 42 are actually implemented as functions.
26 of them are, 26 are classes.
And one is a instance of a callable class.
So like, and some of them in Python two,
there were more and some of them got converted.
Like map and filter and range and zip used to be functions
and now they're objects or classes or something.
The len function, I use that all the time, right?
It's not a function.
It's a callable class.
- Okay.
- Yeah, I mean, I think it's interesting to know
that you don't need to know or be aware of.
So I call this thing.
- Yes, maybe ignore this article.
- No, no, no.
I mean, it's interesting to know.
I'm just saying like,
it's a little bit of a mystery.
I mean, I think it's interesting to know.
- Yeah, I mean, I think it's interesting to know.
need to know or be aware of.
So I call this thing--
- Yes, maybe ignore this article.
- No, no, no.
I mean, it's interesting to know.
I'm just saying like, it's not necessarily a problem
that it's not super clear whether it's a class or function
'cause you call it and it does the thing you want it to do.
So you're good to go.
- Yeah, like Sam Morley pointed out here,
partial is useful.
I think it can be pickled unlike typical closures
that can't, might be wrong.
But it just made me think about,
We, in other languages, they really do talk
about closures a lot and things like that.
And we just don't have to care.
It just works.
I don't know.
- Yep.
- So.
- Very nice.
Very nice.
- Well, we're at least.
- Yeah, we flew through those.
- We did fly through them.
So, and we forgot to plug our stuff.
So instead of a sponsor today, we've got,
we're sponsored by us.
So I want to make sure that everybody that is thinking
about trying to learn something new in Python,
first check out Talk Python Training
because Michael has a whole bunch of awesome courses
and I'm sure you can learn something for just a few bucks.
So good prices.
- And the new book version two, edition two.
- Yeah, I've had a lot of good feedback.
I love, one of the things I love is getting pictures.
I don't know why, but having somebody take a picture
either of themselves holding the Python testing
or a Pi test, second edition, heck,
you can do the first edition too, if that's what you got.
But either holding it somewhere unique,
like out in a park or at, you know,
near a monument or something, that would be so cool.
I love it when people send me pictures, so.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
- Got any extras for us? - Do I have extras?
Yes, you know that I do.
All right, so this first one here, let's check this out.
So this is interesting.
This comes by way of Dan Bader,
And it's the Orion browser.
Just when you thought there was no more room
for new browsers, here's a new browser.
This one is different.
So you can see I'm running Vivaldi these days,
I'm loving that.
Other people are using Brave, right?
And so all of those browsers take the Chromium engine,
strip off the Google stuff, and then put their own shell,
many times more privacy protecting and so on around them.
around them, right?
And we've got Firefox, which is awesome.
It's got its own engine, it doesn't do that.
But almost every other browser is,
let's take Chrome and Chromium and wrap it up
in our own flavor of our thing,
with our own philosophy on how the web should be.
So this Orion browser is that, but for Safari.
- Okay.
- Interesting, so if you're into Safari,
you know it has things like on your Mac,
It has better battery life and so on.
But think of it as like,
I think Brave is probably the closest analogy.
It's like Brave for Safari without the crypto,
but it's got built-in ad blocking,
it's got built-in tracker blocking and all that.
One of the big drawbacks of Safari
is you don't get access to the Firefox
or the Chrome extensions, right?
You just get the Safari ones.
But this one has compatibility both for Firefox
and Chrome extensions in there.
So you can, isn't that cool?
So you can run this privacy protecting
anti-tracker Safari with Chrome extensions.
So it's just out in beta, I believe it's not yet.
It's out in beta right now.
So I'm not sure where it is or where it's gonna go,
but it's a pretty interesting take, isn't it?
- Yeah, it's certified snappy.
- Certified snappy.
Indeed, and it's, I really like its privacy aspect.
So, it says--
- I think the privacy space, and you brought this up,
the privacy space is, there's convenience and there's speed,
but I think that's the place where people can,
we can open up the browser wars again.
Because in a good way to try to,
limit some of the privacy concerns or minimize them.
- So yeah, nobody at Mozilla asked me, but I'll give it.
You know, Firefox is having trouble
sort of keeping its market share.
I think if it could triple down as the browser
that you cannot be tracked with,
the browser that will absolutely preserve your privacy
and then add services around that,
I think that would be great.
The big challenge is, well, guess, you know,
they're 99, 90% funded by Google,
an ad company who doesn't want that.
So there's this, this interesting tension,
but I think, you know, that's a path that I think Firefox
should be taking as well, but this--
- I guess I forgot about that,
that Google was so, such a big stake in Firefox.
- Right, I think that limits their playbook.
I think they can't do things like,
we're gonna make it so we're invisible
if you use Firefox, basically,
because their biggest supporter would not totally love that,
would they?
So anyway, this is a zero telemetry browser and whatnot.
And you can go and download it.
Apparently, it works on Apple Silicon and Intel.
But obviously, being a Safari wrapper,
I believe it only works on Mac and iOS things.
iThings, iOS, iPad, and macOS.
But if you're on those, it's a pretty interesting take.
And just from the browser wars in general,
I think it's pretty interesting to track.
- Yeah, definitely.
It's cool.
- All right, one more quick extra and then off to you.
So last year we all did the PSF
plus JetBrains developer survey,
which is supported by and analyzed by JetBrains,
but is really a PSF survey.
and we had 23,000 Python developers
and enthusiasts participate.
Well, the results are out,
so people can go check those out.
Now, I've got a whole lot more analysis
that I'd like to do before I talk about it,
but they're already out,
so people can start looking around there,
and I'll give you more details next week.
- Yeah, cool.
Yeah, we should definitely cover it next week.
That'd be fun.
- Absolutely.
All right, how about you?
I've got a small thing.
I'm not sure, really needed an entire section,
but Ned Batchelder did, what's in which Python?
So it's a page that has basically everything from,
what did he have?
From 2.1 to 3.11, just a hand,
not like everything that's in every version,
but some of the big hitters that you might know.
So like 3.10 has union types and structure
and pattern matching.
And what do you get with 3.11?
Well, we know it's faster, but do we get like how much?
It's 10 to 60% faster than 3.10.
That's amazing.
And then exactly-
- That's really amazing that after 30 years,
they're like, oh, you know,
this year we're gonna make it 50% faster.
Like that's incredible.
I'm glad that's happening.
- Yeah, and then a new module Tomolib is coming.
So like, which is interesting that we've got
pyproject.toml and it wasn't part of the standard library yet.
So, but a whole bunch of things, like if you can't remember,
like if for some reason you forgot f strings came in
and what was it?
The three, six, apparently I forgot.
So they came in in three, six, 'cause it's on the list.
Unless Ned got it wrong, which probably didn't.
So. - No, I think three, six.
I think that's the biggest mover for 3.6 there.
- Yeah, yep.
And data classes in 3.7, yeah.
So lots of cool stuff.
- Fantastic.
Henry Schreiner out in the audience says
it's the top features from each of the versions since 3.0.
So not everything, not extensive,
but like sort of the big hitters.
- Yeah, I wasn't gonna say top because you know,
there's a lot of people that worked
on a whole bunch of other stuff that aren't on the list
and I appreciate them as well.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Some of it's just setting the groundwork
for the next amazing thing.
- Yeah.
Well, let's wrap up the show with something funny.
- All right, ready for a joke?
All right, this is a joke by Jen Gentleman,
but called to our attention by Luke Morley.
And it says, Jen says, "A programmer had a problem.
"He thought, 'I know, I'll solve it with async.'
"Has problems now, period, to he."
(both laughing)
because of race conditions, of course.
- Yeah, I like it.
- I like it too.
Quick and simple, but yeah.
There's a lot of variations on that joke
and they're all good.
Most of them, I guess.
- So.
- Yep.
- Anyway, well, thanks again, Michael,
for joining me today and it's a great episode.
- Yeah, as always.
- Thanks everybody in the show for showing up.
- Yeah, thanks, Brian.
Thanks everyone for coming.
Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]